and uh what I thought I would um take
you through is um some ideas that uh at
the beginning of the talk some things I
I I feel pretty strongly about and then
some things at the end which are kind of
way um way at the edge of uh of of you
know what we know and and basically
speculation that that I think is useful
nevertheless so um okay so so here are
four things I'm going to try to try to
talk about very quickly first of all I'm
going to um address this issue of
biology solving problems at all levels
in all kinds of problem spaces and uh
point and and argue that genomes are not
drivers if anything they are more like
libraries of affordances and that
Evolution makes problemsolving agents
not solutions to specific problems um I
will not have time to talk about this
normally if I give a long talk I
actually show um how we go about
communicating with the agential material
that underlies um life because we this
is where we have most of our data uh and
then uh what I will talk about is give
some thoughts about um
basically the fact that the the
architecture of life is fundamentally
creative because it is dealing with an
unreliable substrate and that this gives
rise to a a really powerful um
intelligence ratchet and towards the end
if we have time I'll talk about some
recent ideas about Shifting the
perspective of Agents versus data and
and and and how the notion of platonic
space can be um actually useful uh
useful for research so what I'm
interested in is uh to address something
that I think we have which is a degree
of mind blindness and it's it's an
analogy you can you can think about this
as as the electromagnetic spectrum it
used to be back in the day that things
that happen when you wave magnets around
light x-rays all of those things were
thought to be uh very very different
things um actually uh could we mute
somebody um somebody's y there we go uh
thank you and uh and something something
really interesting happened when we
ended up with a proper theory of
electromagnetism which is that first of
all uh
phenomena that were thought to be
extremely different turned out to be
manifestations of the same thing and so
we we we have an idea for how they
relate to each other and it allowed a
technology to be made that um enables us
to detect and interact with and make use
of all kinds of things that were
completely inaccessible to us with our
natural um set of set of Senses so I
think something like that is happening
with cognition where Evolution has given
us some firmware that enables us to uh
recogn certain extremely narrow range of
of kinds of minds and I think we need to
develop Theory and that will lead to uh
to to um practical practical tools to
enable us to recognize uh create and
ethically relate to a very wide d uh
diverse um set of intelligences
regardless of how they got here or what
they're made of and so we're interested
in my group um in uh understanding how
to how to relate to all of these kinds
of weird things and in particular very
important to move experimental work
forward so I like philosophical ideas
that end up being computational models
and then end up being applications and
eventually Therapeutics and this is why
part of the lab does birth defects
regenerative medicine cancer and so on
because that then then we know we're on
the right track and in particular again
what I don't have time to do today but
what I do I have a I've just sort of
made a recent talk about all of this is
is similar to that what happened to
different kinds of numbers where we
slowly with you certain kinds of schisms
and and and people sort of freaking out
when they when they discover certain new
kinds of new kinds of numbers we've kind
of enlarged uh even though some of these
sets are infinite we've discovered novel
uh degrees of infinity and new new kinds
of numbers I I think the same thing is
happening and going to happen more with
the sets of uh of of cognitive agents
that are out there and so we all can
recognize this um some of us are okay
with this or even this but actually uh
it gets really weird and this I'm not
I'm not prepared to talk much like we
could touch on it but I'm not prepared
to talk much about this today but but we
can certainly talk about this and and
the Infinity of of of sensan forms I
think uh once we understand what we're
looking at is getting bigger and bigger
and bigger and we can think about for
each of these things what is needed to
be able to recognize these things and
then what does it break for our
assumptions uh and then and then how do
we how do we do something useful okay so
so the first the first section here is
I'm just going to show you a little bit
of biology and this idea that that what
we call life are systems that self
assemble into a multiscale competency
architecture where every level um has
agendas and and certain capabilities
which explores problem Spaces by
aligning its parts towards larger and
more diverse goals and so this is the
journey that each of us takes uh from
from physics and chemistry which
describe this uh quiescent oite that's
how we all start life eventually through
this slow gradual continuous process no
magic lightning flashes that suddenly
push us into the realm of psychology and
and so on um eventually we end up being
something like this this is what we're
made of these are single cells uh
they're extremely I mean this is this is
a free living organism but but you can
see in the in the single cell no brain
no nervous system uh it has all kinds of
capacities to pursue its own tiny little
goals and then and then uh life normally
goes this way it can take some some
twists and turns it can have a breakdown
of multicellularity a kind of
dissociative identity disorder of the
collective intelligence that gives rise
to cancer it can also with our help go
into new directions such as these anthr
robots which can continue life even
after patient has died we can talk about
all that and what fundamentally uh
happens to bring us into the world is uh
alignment and a kind of um Dynamic
storytelling and what I mean by that is
that when we look at an embryo and there
may be let's say at an early stage it's
a sheet of 100,00 cells why do we look
at that and we say there's one embryo
what what is there one of if there's
100,00 cells what's there one one of
well what there's one of is a particular
uh model a commitment to travel in
anatomical space to a particular
location that describes a whatever it is
that's that's being built a human a
giraffe you know snake whatever and all
of the cells are committed to this one
story of what it is that they're
building okay and the fact that they're
all committed to the same story and
reliably make that journey together is
what allows us to call it one embryo but
if you were to um and and I used to do
this in grad school with with duck
embryos take a little needle and you put
some scratches into this plasterer each
one of these little Islands will align
within itself because it can't feel the
others and self-organized into a new
embryo and you get multiples twins
triplets quadruplets and so on which may
or may not then heal up and and and
reattached but in the meantime you have
multiple individuals so the question is
how many selves are present in an embryo
is not at all obvious it's not nailed
down by the genetics it's a
self-organizing process that leads to
the creation of anywhere from uh why I
shouldn't say creation the manifestation
of anywhere from zero to to half a dozen
or more individuals and um the capacity
of this of this excitable medium is not
really clear much like it's not really
clear in the brain at all of how many
actual individuals fit into a particular
um uh amount of real estate in the brain
and we can we can talk about that um so
so what you have here is then is then
alignment and both physical and and um
functional to a particular uh to
particular model of of navigation of
that space like uh like any good
collective intelligence uh or or any
intelligence really um uh it can be we
can we can think about how reliably it
does its job so here are acorns they
make these oak leaves we think that okay
this is what the oak genome knows how to
do is is direct the formation of exactly
this pattern it's incredibly reliable
they're very good at doing their job
these cells um but um of course it's
hackable and for example this is an
example of a non-human bioengineer this
little wasp that comes around and
deposits some some signals a kind of Bio
prompting that causes these cells to
build something completely different
right so you'd have no idea that these
flat green things uh were actually
capable of building something like this
or something like this and uh and there
are lots of examples that I could show
you how um life hacks each itself and
each other and how we are learning to um
to do it one of the most um interesting
interfaces to this Collective
intelligence much like in the brain
right so what is it in the brain it's bi
it's it's it's bioelectricity or AKA
electrophysiology but that's actually
extremely ancient it it was used as a
cognitive Glue by Evolution long before
uh brains and muscles appeared and so we
now have ways to manipulate to to
observe it and manipulate it and just to
show you a couple things because the
visuals are cool this is an early frog
embryo putting its face together and you
can see the the colors are voltage the
colors are the different voltages of the
cells this is one frame what you're
seeing here is you're reading out the
the the memories inside the collective
intelligence that's navigating that
anatomical space it is uh this is the
memory this is the face so here's where
the mouth is going to go here's where
the eye the right eye is going to be
here are the placodes this is what
guides the downstream gene expression
and the anatomy to form a proper face
this is how this when you ask how do the
cells know what to do this is how they
know what to do this is this is their
their memory and that um bioelectric uh
uh pattern is not just for bundling
together cells to form a single embryo
it actually connects multiple embryos
together so it's a multiscale kind of
phenomenon if I poke this guy here all
of his uh friends each one of these
things is a separate embryo it's a
separate frog embryo each each one of
them finds out about it you you can poke
poke poke this one here within some
minutes they all they all find out about
it and here you can see some cells uh
doing their doing their thing so once
you once you start to read these it's
basically think of neural decoding think
of trying to read the electrophysiology
of the brain and extract um memories and
preferences and and and uh and so on uh
we can do the same thing in
morphogenesis and we can start to
manipulate it so while the normal
flatworm has a very clear memory that it
needs one head and one tail so that when
you cut it into pieces they every piece
makes one head and one tail we can we
can change that we can incept false
memories into these things using
optogenetics and pharmacology and
various other other means and so now you
can say no actually and of course this
is still messy we're still working this
out but you can say no actually you
should have two heads and it's a
perfectly normal one-headed animal right
there he is with the wrong internal
representation of what a correct
planarian should look like it's a latent
memory in fact it's a counterfactual
because it's not true right now right
now he has one head but what happens is
if you cut them if you cut the tail The
Head and the tail that fragment is
actually going to give rise to to a
headed animal and uh I now have to tell
people this is not AI this is not U you
know Photoshop these are real real
results and what happens is because this
is what enables the collective to know
what to build and when to stop so you
can you can read out these pattern
memories um if you continue to cut these
two headed animals they that the memory
holds it's a bioelectric Memory it is
not controlled by the genetics the
genetics are totally wild type nothing
has changed in the genome sequencing The
genome will not tell you that these
things have two heads it will also not
tell you that the whole lineage will
have two heads because you can keep
cutting them and in fact when they
reproduce they cut themselves in half by
on their own and then they regenerate
they will continue to be two-headed
here's a video uh you can see what these
guys are doing so um what we're what
we're seeing here is that uh there are a
variety of uh computational systems uh
at all levels of organization and and I
don't have time to talk about all the
cool things that the genetic networks
are doing they can learn too you don't
even need cells just the molecular
networks alone have six different kinds
of memory including pavlovian
conditioning um but but all of these
things work together and they solve
problems in various spaces and as I uh
mentioned before we are tuned to
recognize medium-sized objects moving at
medium speeds in three-dimensional space
uh and so so crows and primates and
maybe a whale or an octopus we can sort
of get that but what biology is teaching
us is em is that embodiment is really
not uh what we think so when people say
that um a various kinds of AIS are not
embodied because they don't roll around
the room on Wheels and they don't walk
around that I I think that's actually um
not not um uh the right way to think
about it at all because there's lots of
uh perception action loops and goal
directedness and intelligence that take
place in spaces that we cannot see so
your your cells and your tissues are
navigating a high-dimensional space of
possible Gene Expressions they're
navigating a space of physiological
States and of course what we study is
morphospace okay so the space of
possible anatomical configurations and
they don't just roll down Hills and uh
automatically um uh sort of uh do the
same thing every single time they are
really navigating with some amazing
capabilities um the kind of problem
solving that they do is is astounding
I'm just going to show you two examples
we could talk about this for hours uh
and and I think really important for us
to understand uh in in order to make a
real um real artificial intelligence and
then things like that so here here's
just one example um you take this PL
areia these flat worms you put them in a
solution of barium chloride barium is a
non-specific potassium channel blocker
it makes their cells very unhappy their
heads explode literally over over the
next 24 hours their heads explode but if
you leave them in the barium what
happens is that a little while later
they will make a new head and the new
head is completely fine with barium no
problem it's barium adapted when you
check what is different about the
original head and the barium adapted
head you find that it's it's only it's
it's less than a dozen genes that are
different and the trick is that these
guys plar have never seen barium uh both
either these worms nor in their
evolutionary history there's never been
selection for knowing what to do when
you get hit with barium so just think
about this this problem you've got an
Inc you've got an extreme physiological
stressor uh you have on the order of
20,000 control knobs that you can that
you can uh that you can twist so like a
like a maravic bush you know with with
with an incredible number of um
effectors which of these genes do you
turn on and off to solve a novel a novel
stressor it's kind of like being in a
nuclear reactor control room the things
melting down unless you know exactly
what uh how how how you how it works
unless you have a model of your own
apparatus what you don't have time to do
is to start flipping switches randomly
to see to see if life gets better
because you'll you'll be dead and
there's no time for that so so we need
to understand how how these living
systems actually solve novel problems
that they haven't seen before this is
maybe my favorite example um of all time
um this is a cross-section through the
kidney tubule of a salamander so
normally 8 to 10 cells that make this
thing up um what you can do is you can
make uh you can make these NES with um
more more copies of their genetic
material so when you do when you have
more copies of their genetic material so
so instead of two n chromosomes you can
have 4 n 5n 6n and so on when you do
this the the cells get bigger but the N
stays the same size well how can that be
well it's because the cell there's
actually fewer cells that make up the
same structure the cells are bigger but
there's less of them okay um and then
when you make the cells truly gigantic
what you find is that one cell will bend
around itself like this uh and leave a
space in the middle same structure now
now here are a couple of amazing Parts
first first of all this is a completely
different molecular mechanism so instead
of cellto cell communication and and
tubular Genesis here this is
cytoskeletal bending so what the system
is doing is what you would do on an IQ
test you you you use uh various tools at
your disposal to get to the to solve the
problem to get to the same goal um uh in
novel ways uh beyond what what what you
would normally do right it's it's
creative use of the of the tools that
you already have and think about what
this means from the perspective of the
system you come into the world what can
you count on well you can't count on
your environment we all know that but
you also apparently can't you you don't
know how many copies of your genetic
material you're going to have you don't
know how big your cells are going to be
you don't know how many cells you're
going to have but you still have to make
that n and in a minute I'm going to show
you you can actually make other things
but but but you try really hard to make
that n despite the fact that you can't
even rely on your own Parts never mind
the environment you you you can't even
you can't even assume that your parts
are what they are so um here the for the
for the next couple minutes I just want
to talk about this that unlike most of
the things we program um life really
operates with a with a poly Computing
architecture where you are free to
reinterpret all the messages that you
have and those are genetic messages from
the past uh everything you have is up
for interpretation because your
substrate is unreliable you cannot
afford to care too much about what your
ancestors thought that your genes mean
or what your past self thinks that your
memories meant um you have to Sol you
have to reinterpret all the stuff from
scratch I'm just going to show you a
couple of examples of uh how this looks
on three scales on The evolutionary
scale the developmental scale and the um
cognitive scale so um one of the things
uh that I like to think about is
caterpillars and butterflies so
caterpillars um are this kind of a
soft-bodied creature with a controller
suitable for soft bodied motion and they
crawl around and they eat leaves they
have to turn into this thing this that
that lives in the three-dimensional
world and it flies around and it's a
hardbodied creature and it needs a
completely different controller for that
and so in the meantime what it does is
it basically liquefies its brain uh
kills most of the cells breaks most of
the connections and then eventually um
re is is rebuilds a new butterfly brain
okay so what is known is that if you
train the caterpillar uh to let's say
eat leaves when it sees a particular
colored disc it it it's known that
butterflies actually retain this
information so on the surface of it the
the the crazy thing here to think about
is well how do you maintain information
while you're drastically refactoring the
substrate okay and so that that's a cool
question but there's a better there's an
even more uh amazing uh piece to this
which is that the actual memories of the
caterpillar are of absolutely no use to
the butterfly the butterfly doesn't
crawl it doesn't eat leaves it wants
nectar the the the memories of the
caterpillar if they were trying to stay
intact would never survive but if if
they are able to be remapped onto new a
new architecture not just carried over
not just persist but actually change
remap then then they then they survive
into this new embodiment as the creature
uh gains a new life in a higher
dimensional um space so you have here
something like the Paradox of change
where uh if you as a biological organism
or or or a B lineage if you stay the
same you will surely die when the
circumstances change but if you change
to fit those circumstances in a sense
you meaning the old you is still gone
how do you persist you you cannot
persist in place right that's the that
seems to be the the Paradox so um so so
what what I like to think about is this
idea that uh your memories and well
these are memories these are um both
cognitive memories and genetic memories
are just messages from your past self so
what you don't have access to at any
given moment in time is the past you
have no idea what happened in the past
what you have are memory engrams traces
left in your brain and body that were
constructed by your past selves they
were compressed they were um generalized
they went through this this bot leg so
so here are all the stuff that I mean
all the computer science people
recognize this immediately um they're uh
they all all the inputs and the
different uh diverse experiences came
through they were compressed somehow
into these uh this very this very thin
Mater substrate which are the engrams
that weast people still fight about what
what that is but future you has to
decompress them and information was lost
here you don't actually know what uh
these memories mean when you find a
particular memory molecule or or a set
of electrical States in your brain you
don't actually know what they mean you
have to creatively interpret them and
and I suspect that while this part can
be algorithmic and deductive this part I
don't think can I suspect this is and I
don't exactly know what this is I'll
speculate a little bit at the end but
there's something else going on here
which allows uh allows those memories to
remapped in a novel context like every
memory every uh message from from from
others at the current time messages from
past you also need to be interpreted and
you don't need to really care about what
they meant before what you do need to
care about is how do I make them
adaptive now so what the biology is
optimizing for is not uh Fidelity of
information it's saliency so you're not
trying to keep the caterpillar memories
as they are you're trying to remap them
to a new meaning and and new functions
so um the same the same the same thing
is happening in uh so so that's the
cognitive side the same thing is
happening in the developmental side um
when uh when you have uh when you have a
genome and I know I didn't have time to
go through all these examples probably
um uh and you can you can find some of
the stuff some of the stuff in this in
this paper but but the idea basically is
this that that you come into the world
with with a certain uh with a certain
genome but now comes the creative
process so so this is all of past
history this is your genetics now comes
the the fun part of as if you're an
embryo or a regenerating um organ or
anything like that is to say what do
what do these things mean and in my
current environment and given what's
going on now how do I use this
information to do something useful and
we have lots of examples in biology of
of this happening I'll show you a couple
more now so basically the idea is that
you can't overtrain on what the past was
you you assume that the hardware is
unreliable meaning you know you're going
to get mutated you know that protein
come and go you have no idea exactly how
many of anything is in your cell all of
that stuff is very fluid and for this
reason you have to commit to
interpreting on the Fly and what
evolution does is produce systems that
are very good at creative interpretation
of data first that that was the case
physiologically then uh you know um
genetically and developmentally and then
eventually you know conventional
cognition and and uh and and again all
of this all of this uh is is here one of
the cool things about it is that it th
this gives rise to an interesting
intelligence ratchet so the more
creative interpretation of your genome
you do during development the harder it
is for selection to actually know
whether your genome was any good or not
and we've done simulations of this to
show that what happens when you evolve
over a competent material like this is
that the pressure on the structural
genome comes off and all of the work of
evolution starts being done on the
actual algorithm of uh of of the of the
um creative interpretation of of of the
tools that you have because uh because
with each with each you know sort of run
through that Loop it becomes harder and
harder to select better genomes because
you can't see them you can just see the
fact that uh useful useful phenotypes
had appeared and so I think that um that
ratchet started very early on and it
contributes to um to the amazing uh you
know sort of conventional intelligence
that we see in the in the animal world
okay and so the last part just just
maybe two two minutes more uh the last
part is this um when we have these when
the the systems that I showed you when I
talk about problem solving what I've
what I've been showing you are systems
that can get to their goal by different
means so that's William james'
definition of intelligence and there
they're sort of um uh they have these
they have these competencies to to to
you know the the the N will be the same
size even if you mess with the genetics
or the the size of cells or whatever but
what happens when you make novel systems
um where do their goals come come from
because for all of the natural systems
you could say well Evolution did that
Evolution gave you the goal and that's
what we normally say why does this
animal look the way it looks why does it
have behaviors that it has because of
selection eons of selection gave you
that gave you that goal okay what
happens in novel systems I'm I'm very
interested in where goals come from I I
don't really think they come from
Evolution per se uh and so so we wanted
a model system that tries to uh that
tries to study that aspect of it and so
and so in biology we like genetics and
we like en enironment and those are the
two things the two sources of
information that we think and and so on
so so I'm very interested in this kind
of stuff when we make novel novel beings
whether technological hybrids or
biological and uh you know and and
cyborgs and augmented humans and all
kinds of weird stuff U that is already
partially um in existence uh what else I
mean these you know the these things the
these things here don't really
necessarily have a uh a a history of
selection for specific properties where
else are they getting these goals if
it's not what what where do these
patterns come from if it's not selection
and by the way one story I didn't show
you is that uh there is an anatomical
space there are these attractors that
correspond to different species shapes
and we can actually show that uh the
same genetic Hardware can actually visit
multiple attractors it doesn't have to
go to its species specific attractor but
but they're there and then people will
say well okay fine so these are shaped
by Evolution so what I'm really
interested in are patterns that don't
have a history and they don't have an
explanation in terms of physics and what
could that possibly be so so here's one
example this thing is called a Halle a
Halle plot and there's a million
examples I just like these um it's
called a Halle plot it uh you get it
it's a it's a fractal that you get from
from plotting this this very simple
formula this tiny little little seed in
complex number Z if you unpack it gives
you this and if you slowly change one of
these um one of these uh numbers what
you'll get are videos and movies of of
all this kind of stuff so what's
interesting here and then you can you
can make all sorts of other things um
clearly clear complexity uh doesn't hurt
that it's kind of organic looking as
well but what's interesting about it is
that it does not have at least to my
knowledge I'm not a mathematician but to
my knowledge it does not have an
explanation in physics it does not have
an explanation of History it was not
evolved it was not selected it it it it
is it is uh in some way uh indexed into
by this tiny little little uh seed or
pointer um I don't I don't think you can
call it a compression for reasons we can
we can talk about but but clearly there
are there are patterns that come from
from at least mathematics that that do
not have the conventional kind of
explanation that biological patterns
have so how much of this is actually
relevant to biology so so so uh
biologists hate this idea because they
want a nice um uh kind of sparse
ontology where you have you have the
physical world and that's it and they
don't want any you know um any any weird
stuff but um I think a lot of
mathematicians are actually pretty
comfortable that what they're doing is
exploring ing a completely different
world that is not in fact explained by
any fact of physics it it it matters for
physics so it it it has influence in the
physical world um but but but it isn't
something that you're going to find uh
you know by by by by studying physics
and so we've start we we've started to
ask you know what other kinds of
patterns might be interesting for
biology and so uh I'll show you just a
couple of quick things um this this
little thing when you're looking at it
you might think that this is uh some
sort of um primitive organism that we
found from a from a pond somewhere uh if
you were to sequence The genome you
would find out that you're very mistaken
this the genome is homo sapiens 100%
Homo sapiens normal Homo sapiens these
are these we call these anthrotronix
when liberated from the rest of your
body and given a chance to have a new
life the patient that donated these may
or may not be alive but um but these
guys have rebooted their
multicellularity they they do some cool
stuff um they have novel behaviors which
we can arrange in ethograms how like we
do for Animals half their genome is
expressed differently than than what
they were doing when they were uh part
of the tissue inside the inside the
patient they have cool properties like
they will heal your neural wounds so if
you make a big scratch through this
neural neural tissue in vitro they
they'll they'll sit here in this biobot
um cluster and they'll heal it and you
can see here they'll uh you know and who
would have known right who would have
known that your trachel cells can do
this and um we've done this with with
frog embryos too these are these are
xenobots which are are made from a frog
skin cells from embryonic epithelial
cells um they don't have the ability to
reproduce the way normal frogs do but
they've figured out something different
this is basically Von neyman's dream of
a robot that finds material and makes
copies of itself if you provide them
with loose epithelial cells they will
push them together into little into
little piles they then they then sort of
sort of Polish the little piles the
little piles mature into the next
generation of xenobots and guess what
that does it does the same thing it
makes the Next Generation than the next
none of this existed before in evolution
there's been no evolutionary pressure to
be a good zenbot or to be a good anthr
robot and so now we're confronted with
some with two options in order to try to
try to uh deal with these
novel um novel forms behaviors and other
patterns that are not directly selected
for by Evolution we can say they're
emergent which basically just means that
they're surprising to us we can catalog
them and when we come across them well
there they are we we find emergent
things I don't really like it um I like
uh it's it's uh it allows you to have a
to have a a sparse ontology but but it's
kind of a mysterian position I don't
like just saying that well it's a fact
that holds in the physical world and and
and and that's that I I I prefer what I
think is a more um uh optimistic uh
version which is to say much like the
mathematicians is probably an ordered
space of these things and we should have
a research agenda to systematically
investigate them and that the things
that we're making such as xenobots
anobot various chimeras are uh and and
some other crazy stuff such as minimal
algorithms are actually Vehicles they're
exploration vehicles that you can use to
look for patterns in the latent space of
possibilities
and uh and understand how those patterns
come into the physical world and under
what circumstances so um so so so so
this is this is my current hypothesis
and certainly other people have have put
out versions of this uh in the past but
the idea is that I think we now have
actual tools that we can begin to to
study this and to figure out why it is
that the Frog genome doesn't just point
to frog um morphologies um but actually
it knows how to make many different
things that it pulls down and so what I
think are is that the platonic space
doesn't just contain things that
mathematicians like such as facts about
prime numbers and such but also things
that we would recognize as kinds of
Minds in other words behavioral uh uh
patterns and capabilities and what we
make um when we make when when we
produce embryos xenobots computers uh
pretty much anything you're not really
making these kinds of things what you're
doing is making pointers that allow the
ingression of specific patterns from
from that space into the physical world
and our job is to understand the
relationship between the pointers and
the thing they bring down and um uh okay
I'm going to stop because I already run
run way out of time but but just to
point out that uh you know natural
living things are a tiny corner of the
possible space of of beings because any
combination of evolved material
engineered uh material and software is
some kind of a system that's going to
pull down interesting patterns from the
space that we are very bad at predicting
okay we cannot we we really we do not
know what when these things come they
come in extremely minimal forms it
doesn't take much you know we found uh a
crazy capabilities in um classical
sorting algorithms things like bubble
sword which have been studied you know
for decades we can talk about that and I
think uh you know basically what mcre
was trying to tell us here when he said
this is not a pipe is that when when
people say I know what it is I've built
it I I put I built it to with my own
hands I I chose the material so I know
what this is and I know what it can do I
think we have to be extremely careful
because I I don't think anything is
exactly what um what the algorithm or
the material say it is I don't think
that's true for uh for humans in terms
of the laws of biochemistry and I don't
think it's true for machines because of
the formal limitations of the algorithms
that that that they're supposedly
running and um yeah and that's it um so
yeah so so so you know here's kind of
just the summary um of these ideas I we
we now have a research agenda for all of
this stuff um and uh i' just like to uh
thank the people who did all the work
these are the postdocs and the and the
um students in my group and we have lots
of collaborators and and I have to do a
disclosure there are um three companies
that that I'm involved with so thank you